The last couple weeks have not been kind to US airline stocks as both Mother Nature and investors have thoroughly beaten down them down.  Hurricane Irene cut into US Airways’ operating income by as much as $10 million while Delta’s August net profit cost it $15 million in monthly net profit. (source) On Tuesday, fears of a second U.S. recession sent airline stocks plummeting as air travel outlook looked weak. Globally, the airlines’ second quarter financial results have declined by 60% while fuel prices are up 50% from last year. (source) But, is the latest fall grounded in reality?  Looking back, it’s certainly been a challenging decade for airlines since 9/11. US airline revenue fell $23 billion from 2000-2002. Between December 2002 and October 2005, United, Delta, Northwest and US Airways filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Reorganization.  The restructuring that took place over the decade improved productivity, fuel efficiency and reduced accident rates while passengers increased by a billion more people and 16 million more tonnes of cargo was moved. (source) However, the restructuring among the airlines as well as an influx of passengers has not entirely improved the underlying business of the airlines or made them safe investments.  As Osborne notes, there’s a lot that can go wrong since the airline industry is highly competitive while ticket prices must also increase with the cost of fuel, which responds to a myriad of different disturbances.  We’ve taken a different cut at the airline stocks by looking at 10 years of financial statements for US Airways, JetBlue and Southwest Airlines and uncovered disappointing financials that have not improved over the years.  If you’re looking at airline stocks, we hope that this will be a good starting point for your analysis.  US Airways (LCC) A look at US Airways’ fundamentals has shown that they have historically been disappointing. Its financial strength remains weak as shown in their balance sheets where TL-to-TA has hovered around 0.88 – 1.75 since 2001. They have also found it difficult to retain its profits while positive free cash flow has been virtually non-existent up until 2009.  (Click charts to expand) According to its Growth Price (FCF), LCC is currently undervalued by 375.90%. If LCC can turn it around, then the current price is of great value. But, given its track record, this is unlikely.  See Our LCC Report Here JetBlue Airways (JBLU) On Tuesday, the share price of JetBlue traded at half the annual highs recorded in November 2010 while its stock became the most shorted in its industry. (source) A look at their financials over the last 10 years shows that these sentiments are well founded.  Highly capital intensive, poor management of cash as well as a weak balance sheet have been notable features of the company since 2001. Moreover, JetBlue has had the most difficulty of all three airlines in maintaining acceptable net profit margins (2.57% in 2010).  On the bright side, JetBlue has been reinvesting its profits, which may put it in a stronger position in the future. In 2010, its retained earnings grew by 85.29%.  See Our JBLU Report Here Southwest Airlines (LUV) Southwest Airlines appears to be the best of a bad lot. It has withstood industry-wide consolidation, rejected bag fees and stood their ground against the gyrations of fuel prices while continuing to make a profit. (source) This company culture has allowed it to maintain a better competitive advantage than the above two airlines.  While it must suffer like the rest of them, Southwest has been able to maintain better net profit margins than the other two airlines. It also shows a relatively stronger balance sheet and has been able to consistently reinvest profits. Southwest also has a strong dividend history and shows brief instances of stock buybacks.
Amazon (AMZN) is a strong operating company and not a stock that is usually associated with undue hype or other “bubble-like” phenomena. However, just as Walmart (WMT) and Duke Energy (DUK) enjoyed sizeable run-ups during the dotcom bubble of the late 90s, Amazon is enjoying a considerable run-up due to the current cloud bubble.  Although Amazon is a strong company that is showing promise via its services and electronics diversification, I believe that the stock is extremely overvalued. My position is that Amazon is a retail stock that also dabbles in tech, NOT a technology company that also has a marketplace.  The Positives (Amazon as a company): Annualized sales growth of 28.62% ($2.76B in 2000 to $34.2B in 2010) Strong balance sheet (1.4 Current Ratio; $6.3B net cash; no debt) Strong sales base via the Kindle Growing services division The Negatives (Amazon as a stock): 22% equity dilution over the past 10 years (81M net shares issued) No return to shareholders via dividends or share repurchases Trading over 75 P/E of 2011 projections (based on $2.40 EPS) Trading at a trailing P/S of 2.4 – P/B of 10.5 Sales tax loopholes rapidly closing Strong competition in the tablet sector & in the web services sector Summary Amazon has performed very impressively over the past 10 years (mainly in terms of sales growth); however, this (and aggressive EPS estimates) is already heavily priced into its stock price. Amazon has been able to grow its online sales while its customers enjoy tax-free purchases. This loophole is rapidly closing, with California and Illinois creating the largest waves. Amazon realizes that losing the tax advantage will severely crippled its competitive advantage, and it is pledging $2.25M to fight the recent CA tax measure. Ironically, Amazon has agreed to comply with Senator Durbin’s newly proposed “Main Street Fairness Act,” but I believe that they are doing this because they know the tax will fail in the Republican house and they want to avoid a “tax dodger” reputation.  The Kindle is a widely selling device, but at current prices, does not provide significant margins; however, this is a nice “foot in the door” move to sell e-books. I believe that their tablet will fall flat similar to the HP Touch Pad. The technology (cloud hosting) division is promising; however, the total revenue contribution is insignificant compared to AMZN’s retail arm.  The Trade Simple Short - If you buy into the AMZN “retailer trading like a tech growth” overvalued argument, I recommend either purchasing Jan 12 otm puts (recommend $160 at $13.90), or selling short with long call coverage for insurance (I recommend the $200 call at $11.50). If the long call is used with a 1-1 coverage, the breakeven point will be $166 AMZN on the downside end with a maximum loss of $3396 ($200 close exactly). If you have the stomach for naked shorting, you can also try that approach.  Spread Option - If you want to maximize your gains while limiting your potential losses to $2100 per spread, you can sell the $170 call while buying a $190 call and a $150 put ($100 net cost). This represents profitability below $149 and maximum loss at $190 or higher. $100 AMZN price nets roughly $5000 per spread.  Tax Law play - Short using the above technique and buy stock (or long calls- I prefer stock on this one though since the rough market might require a long time horizon) in Best Buy Co. (BBY) and GameStop Corp. (GME). I believe both stores will benefit largely from a shift in sales tax policy. I have already written articles that contain more valuation information on both Best Buy and Gamestop and more on Gamestop.
Apple (AAPL) and Google (GOOG) have been on everyone’s radar as the most promising technology companies. Cisco Systems (CSCO) has also been on everyone’s radar as a potential turn around; and Amazon.com (AMZN) has been the favored web-based stock among the momentum crowd. Investors should avoid all of them, plus Netflix (NFLX), for all kinds of reasons that undermine visibility into the future of these companies at this point: Apple Apple is, perhaps, the most promising technology company, but can it maintain or even accelerate momentum? The answer is that we don’t know, as a number of factors cloud its immediate future: Weak economy. Most of Apple’s revenue, for instance, comes from consumer products that are discretionary items in the consumer budget. A good deal of revenue comes from middle and higher education, depending on state and local budgets that have been scaled down dramatically.  Leadership vacuum. Steve Jobs' recent resignation leaves a leadership vacuum in the company that may undermine its ability to continue churning blockbuster products.  Potential competition from Google. Google’s acquisition of Motorola Mobility (MMI) is expected to create Apple’s first serious challenge in the iPhone market, especially in emerging markets. Already Dell Computer (DELL), and Baidu (BIDU) have teamed together to manufacture and market Android-based phones in the Chinese market.  Google Google, another promising technology company is facing its own issues that cloud its immediate future.  Weak Economy. Google’s revenue comes mostly from sales of advertisement space, which are discretionary in company budgets. This means that a weak economy or an outright recession will make a big dent in Google’s revenue.  Move into Manufacturing. With the purchase of Motorola Mobility, Google is soon to bundle together its software with Motorola Mobility’s hardware, as Apple has been doing with its iPhone.  While this strategic move may help Google to compete efficiently and effectively against Apple, it raises serious questions as to whether the company can become a good manufacturer and its blend its business model well with Motorola Mobility’s.  Developing search engines and advertising and operating platform systems requires a more liberal and entrepreneurial organization that allows employees to experiment with new things with little supervision. Manufacturing mobile devices, on the other side, requires a less liberal organization that defines the different tasks employees must perform under extensive supervision, which includes close monitoring and control.  Regulation issues. After settling regulation issues in the US, Google continues to face issues in Europe and Asia, especially Korea and China.  Cisco Cisco, a fallen angel from the Dot.com era, and long-rumored as a turn around is facing its own problems: the transition from and emerging to a mature company; growing competition from Alcatel-Lucent (ALU), Hewlett-Packard (HPQ), Juniper Networks (JNPR) and Huawei Technologies Co.; inability to keep up with competition; and, of course, its own leadership issues.  Amazon.com A still ascending angel from the dot.com years, Amazon.com’s immediate future is challenged by extremely low operating margins; the shifting of the book sales industry from hard copies to e-books, an area where there fewer barriers to entry; a loss of focus—the company is trying to compete head to head with Apple in wireless devices, a business outside its core competence; and a shift in momentum, due to deferral of Internet-based IPOs like Zynga and Groupon.  Netflix As we wrote in previous pieces, Netflix (NFLX) doesn’t have a sustainable competitive advantage. It doesn’t have barriers to entry. It does sell somebody else content with a technology that isn’t proprietary. It is a matter of time before its business is squeezed from all directions; and eventually becomes a commodity.
Since last week’s huge news about Hewlett-Packard (HPQ) I’ve been hoping to write something, but I was traveling and didn’t time to collect my thoughts. Even after five days, the news still doesn’t make sense, other than as the death throes (or at least mortally wounded throes) of a once-great giant.  Yes, HP has serious problems. It’s been unable to find a decent CEO since its founding. Simultaneously chasing both Dell Inc. (DELL) and IBM, it caught and passed Dell for a prize it no longer wants, while it seems unlikely to ever catch IBM (at least in my lifetime).  The HP board and CEO Léo Apotheker seem incapable of dealing with the current challenges. It has come to having HP’s chairman bad-mouthing Apotheker’s predecessor for “under-investment” in the core business.  But this is only the latest desperate effort in more than a decade of throwing one Hail Mary pass after another. Its $1.2b purchase of Palm and webOS was (as predicted) a major mistake. It allowed the (previously dying) Palm cellphone business to die, and meanwhile the efforts to establish the TouchPad as a viable iPad rival has failed miserably - much like Research In Motion (RIMM) - with Best Buy (BBY) selling fewer than 10% of those ordered.  Yes, a couple of things make sense from the announcements. Yes it’s time to cut the losses on the webOS acquisition. Perhaps claiming it has a future as a consumer embedded OS postpones the inevitable write-down, but competing against a no-royalty embedded Linux will be difficult at best.  And at some level, the divorce of the low margin PC business from the potentially high margin software/services business has a business logic. Mark Hurd was the right man to run the commodity business while Apotheker prefers higher margin services, and neither was suited to run both together in a single company.  The problem is that the current HP is a conglomerate of the leading commodity PC maker, the leading (increasingly commoditized) printer maker, and a hodgepodge of largely second-tier software and services businesses.  Under Hurd, the company had embraced commoditization — executing on Carly’s Compaq acquisition and doing an exemplary job of competing in commodity markets. The only cost was the heart and soul of Bill and Dave’s company, ripping it out as the company shed workers, perks and the exemplary culture that once inspired Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak.  Then the HP board panicked over Hurd’s poor judgment and forced him out, replacing the successful commodity numbers weenie with just the opposite: a software guy who was presiding over the dying SAP franchise. Apotheker had not solved SAP’s problems — coasting on the inertia of its once-invincible lock-in rents in the BPR segment — so he was rewarded with the reins of Silicon Valley’s oldest and most storied company.  A completely different CEO meant a completely different strategy, which in turn requires a different portfolio of businesses. (It also requires different competencies up and down the line, which the latest moves pointedly do not address.) Even if exiting PCs now makes sense, as others have noted HP has completely bungled the planned PC spinout. IBM’s decision to sell its division came as a bolt from the blue with the buyer already announced. Apparently HP shopped the PC business and didn’t get its desired price, so now the uncertainty around the PC division (the born-again Compaq) will cause it to hemorrhage customers and market value until it’s finally dumped.  In the end, I have to lay the current problems on the board, which brought us the infamous spying scandal, melodrama over the last 3 CEO appointments and of course forcing out its best directors, Tom Perkins (of Kleiner Perkins fame) and George Keyworth. As Perkins noted in a 2007 video and his memoir, the board groupthink forced out any dissenting view — which (to further mangle metaphors) is a recipe for marching lockstep over a cliff.  Who’s on the board? Two insiders, three private equity investors, a failed startup technologist turned investor (Mark Andreessen), a former consumer products exec (Meg Whitman), execs of two failing telecom companies, the CEO of a successful software lock-in business, CEO of a major consulting company, chairman of a specialty chemicals business, and Larry Elison’s longtime sidekick (turned nemesis and Kleiner Perkins managing partner).  Oddly, while the board has exemplary gender diversity it lacks the obligatory university professor or president. I suspect Intel (INTC) benefitted greatly from the advice of longtime director David Yoffie — even if I didn’t always agree with his analysis.  (If HP goes looking for an academic, Tim Bresnahan of Stanford has understood the economics of platform businesses longer than anyone.) Apparently I’m not the only one fed up with the HP board. After the 20% drop in HP stock Friday, fellow Seeking Alpha contributor Vitaliy Katsenelson wrote: Anger and frustration are the two emotions pulsing through my veins as I write this. HP (HPQ), once the symbol of innovation, is being dismantled by its high-pedigreed board and the CEO of the hour. … [In] the early 2000s, when Carly Fiorina, then CEO of HP, engineered the HP merger with Compaq. … [N]ine years and two CEOs later HP has announced that the PC business, the one it so desperately wanted just a decade ago, is too hard a business and that it will look for ways to get rid of it. Almost in the same breath HP announced that it will kill WebOS devices, a business it acquired in April 2010 for $1 billion; and management, possibly missing the irony in those two announcements, went ahead and announced another acquisition, which this time will for sure transform the company.  I don’t need to have a great imagination to envision another conference call in August 2015, where a new CEO decides that the software business is too difficult, and HP needs to come back to its roots (maybe going back to making calculators) and will spin off the software business into a new company, take an enormous charge, and then maybe announce an acquisition that the same highly pedigreed board will rubber-stamp.  … HP’s stock sold off not because the company disappointed Wall Street but because Wall Street grew tired of the overpriced “must-have” acquisitions. Wall Street has smartened up and assumed that this acquisition, as with many other “transformative” acquisitions, will do nothing of the sort.  I’d like to hope that HP will turn around some day, but I can’t see how to get there from here. It would require an entirely new board, one with more winners than losers and more big company operating experience. HP and its board are too big to be threatened with a hostile takeover, and so will muddle along — acquiring baubles with the shareholders’ checkbook — without a coherent long-term strategy or market niche.
One of the rationales for investing in Sears Holdings Corp.(SHLD) from the beginning of controlling shareholder Eddie Lampert’s ownership has been the real estate play. The stores themselves were supposed to have unrecognized value even if the retail business was performing poorly.  It’s time for that theory to be tested, argues Ken Kurson, financial columnist for Esquire magazine. He says the only value at Sears and Kmart, the company’s two retail chains, “is the bet against them.” “I believe that there's an excellent chance that within a year SHLD will trade for half of what it trades for today,” Mr. Kurson wrote as the shares sat at $70 (U.S.) earlier this summer, adding that he has shorted the stock “from time to time.” (Sears Holdings closed Tuesday at $59.89.) More bluntly, Mr. Kurson says “I also believe that within a year, Sears and Kmart will no longer exist as freestanding stores. And that will be a damn shame.” The troubles at Sears and Kmart are well known, with declining sales and market share. (Sears Canada, which Sears Holdings also controls, has fared better).  Mr. Lampert has supported Sears’ stock price with aggressive share repurchases totaling $394 million last year and $101 million in the first quarter, Mr. Kurson notes. (I made similar points in a Globe and Mail column earlier this year.) Says Mr. Kurson: “For six years, this tactic has worked, at least as far as the stock is concerned. With negative earnings (and thus no P/E or forward P/E), it's an impressive mirage that Sears continues to trade in the $70 range. Investors love company leaders who obsess over stock price. But customers couldn't care less.” Befitting a men’s magazine, Mr. Kurson’s columns are testosterone-laced, often written with a tone that suggests those who fail to heed his advice lack intestinal fortitude. A prediction that the chains will cease operating is one of his more aggressive calls.  If anywhere close to true, however, the value of Sears Holdings will then be found not in two money-losing retailers, but in the liquidation value of the stores they operate in. Investors probably shouldn’t expect it to be $60 per share, the current level.
