Adobe Systems (ADBE) is a computer software development company operating in five segments: Digital Media Solutions, Digital Enterprise Solutions, Creative and Interactive Solutions, Omniture, and Print and Publishing. While most people are familiar with Adobe through Adobe Reader and Adobe Flash Player, these include only a small fraction of the company’s revenue. The bulk (84%) is comprised of professional graphics and communication software. Adobe Flash and Photoshop are the industry leaders, well ahead of competitors and open source software. It is the most used software in universities, creating a loyal customer base that has been trained from youth to preform best when using Adobe’s software.  Adobe ($24.40 as of 9/7/11) is selling at a PE of 13, well below its 31 median PE, and 11x net free cash. The company has an estimated $5.32 of cash and short term investments per share. Debt is 12% of cap, 60% of it long term, and no liabilities of a pension plan. Current ratio is a strong 3:1. Its margins are around the industry average, however it has a lower return on total capital of 13% vs. industry average of 23%.  Adobe fell 32% since May. Competition fears from big companies like Microsoft (MSFT) and Oracle (ORCL) as well as overall market conditions have contributed to this decline. If Adobe cannot lead the innovative front it may lose market share. However, Adobe has carved a strong niche in graphic design and media software and it is not likely they will lose this position anytime soon. Software companies tend to get hurt in a recession when demand for software slides. Adobe’s strong financial strength adds safety to this otherwise risky industry. Solid revenues, cash flow, earnings, and intangible assets of brand loyalty make Adobe a serious consideration at this price.
Since the iPad was released in 2010, Apple (AAPL) has dominated the tablet market with what looks like ease. Numerous challengers to the iPad have come and gone. Motorola, (MMI), HP (HPQ) and Dell (DELL) have all tried to challenge the iPad, and all have failed. However, there is one company with a challenger that has yet to be revealed, and it is a company that may very well be the only viable challenger to the iPad's throne. And that challenger is Amazon.com, (AMZN) which we think is not only a buy due to its tablet prospects, but its fundamental business as well.  When one thinks of Amazon one usually thinks of an online Wal-Mart (WMT), not a tablet manufacturer. But with a tablet launch looking increasingly likely (click here), we felt it was time to highlight Amazon's prospects in this field. In our opinion, Amazon has several things going for it that other non-Apple tablet manufacturers do not.  Loss-leadership: Apple has shown us that its $499 iPad is what other tablets are measured against. Pricing a non-Apple tablet above it (think Xoom) does not work, nor does pricing it below (Acer, Dell, etc...). Apple leads the tablet field in profitability and margins, placing its competitors in a bind. They cannot manufacture tablets as cheaply, (due to Apple's supreme supplier/manufacturer relationships) forcing them to price their tablets higher. This fails because none of these tablets are as good as the iPad, and pricing them even higher only highlights those deficiencies. On the other hand, manufacturers cannot price their iPad competitors below the iPad, as they would lose money. While it is clear cheap tablets, such as a $99 TouchPad, sell, they also lose money. This goes against the very reason for being in the tablet market. The end result is that competitors to the iPad are either overpriced or cheap, in both name and quality. But we feel that Amazon can overcome this. While there is no doubt that the Amazon tablet will be relatively inexpensive, we do not feel this will come at the expense of quality. Amazon is perfectly willing to take a loss on hardware to sell content, as the Kindle has shown us.  Content: Amazon's store of content is second only to Apple itself. Amazon now sells more Kindle books than actual books and this has more than covered its losses on selling the Kindle. Amazon is notorious for sacrificing profits in the short-term for long-term profit growth, and we feel this endeavor will be no different.  Sales network: Amazon has an unparalleled distribution center for its tablet. Amazon.com, the world's most popular shopping website, is a perfect way to sell anything. The Kindle would have never been such a success had it not been made by Amazon itself and endlessly promoted on the website. Amazon will surely do the same thing with its tablet. It will literally sell itself. Combining that with the expanding streaming content available for Amazon Prime customers and it will be a combination that no other non-Apple manufacturer will be able to beat.  We are not going to pretend that Amazon will dethrone Apple (our largest holding) as the tablet king. But we feel that Amazon, if it executes as it has in the past, should be able to carve out a profitable niche for its tablet, making it an even more compelling stock. In our opinion, Amazon is the last company left that can stand up to Apple in the tablet business.  Now we turn to the fundamental reasons Amazon is a great stock for long-term investors.  Amazon is changing the way we shop and what we expect from our shopping experience. It made free shipping an industry standard and few websites have Amazon's ease of use. Sales increased by 51% last year, both in North America and internationally. And while Amazon does not disclose Kindle sales it did state that "sales growth of Kindle devices accelerated in second quarter 2011 compared to first quarter 2011." (click here) Skepticism abounded about the Kindle when it launched, but the critics have been proven wrong and the Kindle dominates the dedicated e-reader market.  Most companies tout their rapid international growth, which Amazon has plenty of, given that international sales increased 51% year-over year. But few companies are able to grow just as rapidly in their home markets, where Amazon's sales also rose 51% year-over year. Amazon is well-positioned to capitalize on the secular trend of growth in e-commerce, which will grow regardless of macro-economic conditions. It is irrelevant to Amazon if people shop less. What matters is that they do more of their shopping online. Amazon has been preparing for this day, which is why its net income has stagnated, even while revenue has soared. Amazon makes no secret of the fact that it is willing to sacrifice profits in the short-term for long-term success.  Amazon is an expensive stock by any measure, trading at a P/E of over 92 and a forward P/E of 89. But Amazon's net income has been depressed due to its investments in technology and infrastructure, which we feel will soon begin to pay off handsomely. Net income at Amazon has quadrupled between 2006 and 2010. (from 45 cents/share to $2.53/share) In addition, Amazon has a good balance sheet, with over $6 billion in cash ($13 per share).  Click to enlarge As for the tax issue sprouting up in several states, we feel that Amazon will navigate this as well. Currently the company pays taxes in only five states. They are Washington (where it is based), Kansas, Kentucky, North Dakota and New York, where it is challenging the legality of the law. The Supreme Court is on Amazon's side, and Amazon can simply cut its affiliates in states that press it on taxes, (such as California) or not build warehouses in those states. The morality of Amazon's tax issues can be debated endlessly, but for practical business purposes, they are a competitive advantage that Amazon will not give up without a fight, and it is a fight that it is currently winning.  Amazon has shown its detractors time and again that it will do what is needed for long-term success. The short-term does not matter to Amazon. What matters is the long-term. And patient shareholders have been rewarded for it, with the stock up over 12,400% since its IPO, compared to the S&P 500's 40% advance in the same time period.  Click to enlarge Amazon could very well unnerve undedicated shareholders with stagnant income as it invests in its infrastructure to prepare for an online future. But those who have stayed with the company have done well, and we feel will continue to do well in the future.  Amazon is a buy at these levels due to its tablet initiative, which we believe is the only tablet even remotely capable of competing with Apple. In addition, the secular growth opportunities Amazon has make this stock a great investment for long-term shareholders. Analysts agree with this. S&P rates Amazon a buy with a $250 price target. Barclays sees the stock reaching $240 and BofA Merrill Lynch sees it at $255. Amazon is uniquely positioned to capitalize on a secular shift to online shopping and we think that investors in Amazon will be richly rewarded for it.
Cree Inc. (CREE), the LED company that saw its shares rise from the mid $30s in late 2009 to over $80 in April of 2010, is now back down to levels it hasn't seen in two years. The company seems to be doing well, but a series of earnings guidance lowerings during conference calls have hit the stock again and again. Now that this company has settled back into the low $30s, let's take a look at what the company has going for it.  Nobody can argue with the pristine balance sheet that Cree has always had. The company has avoided debt, so you don't have to worry about paying much interest. The current ratio is above 10 as of the latest quarter, and the company has over $1.3 billion in working capital. The company had nearly $1.1 billion in cash and equivalents, equal to almost $10 per share. Now, these numbers will come down a bit, as the company recently announced the acquisition of Ruud Lighting. However, this is an acquisition that should benefit the company's bottom line early in 2012.  The company has also invested heavily in itself, increasing its PP&E by $136 million over the prior fiscal year, equating to 32% growth. The company's inventory levels have also risen from $112 million to $176 million over that time, which has caused some levels of concern. However, you can't sell what you don't have. It will be interesting to see if the inventory buildup continues in this current quarter.  Cree has experienced a slowdown, which is why earnings for this fiscal year (ending in June of 2012) are expected to fall to $1.43 from $1.70 in the 2011 fiscal year. However, revenues are still expected to increase by 28% to $1.27 billion. Cree is expecting flat revenue growth for the current quarter, but is expecting to see revenues grow 22% sequentially in the next quarter. The guidance given during the earnings conference call will definitely affect how this stock moves forward.  Cree currently trades at a P/E of 22, which is not too high for a $3.5 billion growth company. It has demanded a higher P/E in the past, which could return if the company hits its targets. I wouldn't bet the farm on CREE, but this no-debt growth company could be a nice addition for some diversification.
Reading through the MarketWatch commentary on August 19th uncovered the “Stupid Investment of the Week,” a regular series by Chuck Jaffe. I have read Chuck’s articles from time to time. Though they tend to be a little dramatic, they usually have some good detail. The entry on Principal Financial Group (PFG) stated, After the financial crisis of 2008, Principal’s balance sheet had some noticeable changes. At some point in 2009, some $50 billion in “long-term investments” was reclassified. It showed back up as “other assets.” Jaffe goes on to take quotes from other PFG bears and warns investors of shady accounting and alarm bells. This would all be very scary and the kind of journalistic scoop that could make a shrewd trader a very nice profit. The problem is, it’s not true. If one were to look only at Yahoo Finance, there is a $50 billion change in the balance sheet reflected under long-term assets in 2008 and then in other Assets in 2009. This would certainly raise red flags for me, if I had not gone directly to the company’s financial statements to verify the information.  Looking at Principal’s 10-K for 2009 (pdf) shows that the majority of its long-term assets is accounted for in a line-item called separate account assets. This account reflects roughly half (48%) of total assets and is defined as, ...the fair market value of funds that are separately administered by us for contracts with equity, real estate and fixed-income investments. The separate account contract owner, rather than us, bears the investment risk of these funds. The separate account assets are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of any of our other business.  The balance sheet entry for this account increases from $55 billion in 2008 to $62 billion in 2009. Further on in the financial statement is an evaluation of the fair value for these assets divided into three levels. The level I measurement, 64.5% of the total assets, is the highest quality estimation and valued from quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level II assets, 29.0% of the total, are valued from quoted prices in active markets for similar assets. So it seems that, not only does Principal bear no investment risk in these assets but they also mark them to market using standard accounting principles. The alarm bells have stopped and we are currently back at DEFCON 5.  The change in the balance sheet on the Yahoo Finance site may just be somebody reclassifying these real estate assets from long-term assets to a catch-all “other” account. This would be appropriate, as the assets are not really PP&E, as is normally understood. The problem here is a common one for data aggregation services on the internet. Whether through human error or a glitch in a data-finder program, sometimes information is misclassified or just plain wrong.  The point is not that Yahoo Finance or Mr. Jaffe made a mistake, but that investors should NEVER make investment decisions based on data from a singular source. If you are paying someone to do all your analysis then they should be making your decisions and would be liable for the quality of data. If you are taking any part in the decision-making process, and I hope you are, then you need to do your own due diligence in data collection. One of your sources should always be the company’s SEC registered financial documents. It is not to say that some financial statements will not contain shady accounts and sometimes outright fraud, but they will usually be free of simple data transcription problems.  As for Principal Financial Group, I am bullish in the short- and long-term. I like the company’s 2.4% dividend yield and they just announced a $200 million buyback plan in August. On August 2nd, the company reported that second-quarter earnings almost doubled on strong growth in fees, premiums, and investments and analysts have been raising full year estimates since the release. Analysts are expecting full-year earnings of $2.98 per share in 2011 for a price-earnings of 8.1 times which isn’t a spectacular value but not overpriced either.  Though the real estate market is not rosy, corporate profits are generally very good, meaning default rates on CMBS should be coming down. Similarly, even if the real estate market does not rebound but more or less stabilizes, the default rates in asset backed securities will come down considerably as the quality loans remain and others get worked out. The stock had a good day Wednesday, closing up over 8% but is still down about 4.6% over the last 12 months.
Valero Energy (VLO) has been hit hard in the most recent selloff, falling as much as 42 percent from its April high. Valero has since recovered but I still see further upside.  Here are some elements I like about the Valero Energy story: • Second quarter operating income was $1.3 billion versus operating income of $904 million in the second quarter of 2010.  • Second quarter throughput margin was $11.41 per barrel, which increased $1.84 compared to the same quarter in 2010. This was Valero's highest second quarter margin in 3 years.  • Margins on Gulf Coast gasoline increased 29% from $7.97 per barrel in the second quarter 2010, to $10.26 in the same quarter 2011.  • Gulf Coast ULSD versus LLS margins increased 16% for the second quarter 2010 to $11.49. So far in the third quarter, Valero is seeing its margins increasing further, averaging margins of about $13 per barrel.  • Valero benefits from WTI-type and Eagle Ford crude pricing, which are at a substantial discount to LLS. The discount helped 3 of its refineries that have crude oil priced at or below WTI. Valero plans to increase the use of discounted Eagle Ford crude.  • Oppenheimer recently upgraded Valero and expects another 60% upside.  I'm bullish on Valero and expect more upside. Valero plans to increase the amount of Eagle Crude used in its refineries. This will help grow revenues and margins going forward. Valero also plans to investment $3.5 billion to increase its refining capacity, which could add another $1 billion in operating income.
